CPU has major 4 components , lets learn them first and will continue with the flow:

1. Control Unit : It fetches instructions from memory , decodes them and decides which component should work. So it doesn't do calculations or store data. so Control Unit is the Commander. Ex: When a program is running, instructions live in memory. The Control Unit takes them one by one, understands what they mean, and tells the rest of the CPU what to do.

For example, when your program says:  “Add these two numbers” , the Control Unit figures out:
Which numbers?
Where are they stored?
Which unit should do the calculation?
Where should the result go?

Then it then sends signals to the registers, the ALU, and the memory system to make this happen. Without the Control Unit, the CPU would be powerful but completely directionless.

2. ALU(Arithmetic & Logic Unit): Its a physical unit made upon the silicon waffer from logic gates using transistors that performs the basic Arithmetic               addition,substraction,multiplication,division ) , Logical operations ( AND,OR,NOT,NAND,XOR,ADDER etc ) & comparisons ( > , < , >= , <= , == ). So it actually performs calculations.
ex: age = 20
if (age>18): print("vote now") else: print("No vote") , so this is like first Control unit gets the memory address of the instrcution from the program counter , then it fetches that instruction from the (L1,L2,L3 cache or from RAM) memory using the address ( such as 0x00401000) and store the instruction in Instruction register , then decode the instruction and  decide what to do next, next it ask the ALU to do the computation and create a flag (true/false) according to the computational calculation.

3. Registers: These are very fast storage that temporarily holds data ( address,numbers) made of flip-flop circuits in the cpu silicon chip, Faster than cache & RAM. Number of registers differ acccording to the modern CPU architecture(more than 70+).

4. Cache Memory (L1,L2,L3): Cache/SRAM is a very fast storage (physical) in the cpu chip. Its mainly used to store data that is frequently used by user. Its faster than RAM(DRAM) & larger than registers. whenever we lets say open yt , so everytime the browser data is cached for fast access. SO the speed order is : Registers → L1 Cache → L2 Cache → L3 Cache → RAM → Disk.  L3 cache is a shared cache among all multiple cores in the cpu.

5. Instruction Decoder : Its main job is to decode the instruction stored in the Instruction Register and generate signals that the Control Unit uses to execute that instruction.
EX: After the instuctions stored in the IR ( such as 10101000 00110010 ), the Instruction Decoder decodes this binary into meaningful signals so that the CU can understand and take decision.

--- After these 5 major components there are another crucial components that are a part of a modern CPU. Lets discuss them !

6.Instruction Pipeline : The pipeline splits instruction execution into stages so the CPU doesn’t wait for one instruction to fully finish before starting the next.
Example:
While instruction A is executing in the ALU, instruction B is being decoded, and instruction C is being fetched.
Like an assembly line — multiple cars built at once.

7.Branch Prediction Unit: It predicts whether a branch (if/else, loop) will be taken so the CPU can fetch the next instruction early.
Example:
In a for loop that runs 100 times, the predictor learns that the branch is “taken” almost every time and keeps the pipeline full.

8. Instruction Scheduler : Decides which instruction should be sent to execution units next based on readiness.
Example:
If instruction 1 is waiting for memory but instruction 2 is ready, the scheduler runs instruction 2 first instead of stalling.

9. Out-of-Order Execution Engine : It allows instructions to execute as soon as their inputs are available, not strictly in code order.
Example:
A = B + C
D = E + F
If B is slow to load but E is ready, the CPU executes the second line first internally.

10. Reservation Stations: Hold instructions that are decoded and ready but waiting for data or a free execution unit.
Example:
An instruction waits here until its required register value arrives from memory.

11. Reorder Buffer (ROB): Ensures results are written back in the correct program order even if execution was out of order.
Example:
Even if instruction 2 finishes before instruction 1, the ROB commits instruction 1’s result first to keep program correctness.

12. Load / Store Unit: Handles all memory reads and writes safely and in the right order.
Example:
If one instruction writes to a variable and another reads it, the LSU ensures the read sees the correct value.

13. Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB): Caches recent virtual → physical memory address translations.
Example:
When your program accesses memory repeatedly, the TLB avoids slow page-table walks each time.

14. Execution Units (beyond ALU): Different execution units specialize in different types of work.
Example:
Integer math → integer unit
Floating-point math → FPU
Video/math vectors → SIMD/AVX unit
They run in parallel.

15. Register Renaming Logic: Maps logical registers to physical ones to remove false dependencies.
Example:
Two instructions both use “R1” in code, but the CPU maps them to different physical registers so they don’t block each other.

16. Prefetch Unit: Predicts future memory accesses and loads data into cache early.
Example:
While reading an array sequentially, the prefetcher loads the next elements before the program asks for them.

17. Micro-op (µop) Cache: Stores decoded instructions so the CPU can skip decoding next time.
Example:
Loops benefit heavily — decoded instructions are reused directly, saving power and time.
